because i really think better brain
better decisions better brain better
relationships better brain more money
better brain better life
hope you enjoyed the episode brought to
you by our sponsor thrive get 50 off
your at home gut health test when you go
to try thrive dot com slash impact
theory enjoy the
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory today we are joined by
a psychiatrist best-selling author and a
brain scan ninja dr
eamon thank you so much for being here i
always love spending time with you and
reading your books they are incredible
have been life-changing for me
and the most recent one your brain is
always listening is no exception so
thank you so much for being here
well thank you for helping me spread the
word about
brain health
so speaking of the brain if it's always
listening what is it always listening to
and what is this idea of dragons that
you talked about in the book i find this
really useful
well your brain is always listening it's
listening to your past it's listening to
the food you eat it's listening to
marketers it's listening when you say
it's listening to your past is it
listening to what you say about your
past or are you using listen as sort of
an umbrella for
reliving
the past for many people is always
present
for them
and
i got this idea
of dragons from the past that still
breathe fire on your emotional brain so
i was doing a podcast with dr sharon may
who's a friend of mine a relational
therapist and she started talking about
dragons from the past that were ruining
relationships and then she and i started
collaborating it's like well let's
identify the dragons and we came up with
of them and a couple the pandemic just
exploded like the death dragon or the
grief and lost dragon
but my whole life i was living with the
invisible
abandoned or insignificant dragon one of
seven
i was in the middle i'm a second son in
a lebanese family which means you're
expendable
which turned out to be beautiful because
i didn't have to go on the grocery
business right and lebanese families the
oldest child the oldest male child goes
in the business and is your brother
still in the business my brother is
president of the business wow
i don't think i'd ever heard you talk i
mean your dad was really successful in
the business that he built i didn't
realize just how much sort of
i guess ended up not being familiar
pressure for you but certainly would
have been for your brother
well it's pressure when you grow up with
a dad that's very successful and he
ended up being the chairman of the board
of a four billion dollar company
um
you often just go like i can never
live up to that and so you're struggling
in that
comparison which is actually the second
dragon the inferior flawed dragon and i
had that one in spades you know being
short and
second
and
um
you know it helped me in so many ways
right the dragons have downsides
but they also have upsides if you have
felts insignificant well i built a life
based on being significant and it sort
of worked
so how do you help people reconcile that
like when i when i
read the book i'm hearing about these
dragons they mostly sound negative but
you
in terms of if they go unchecked your
prefrontal cortex is offline it really
does become pathological and it becomes
a problem but i'm obsessed with this
idea that there's pathology on both
sides so if you have too much drive it's
going to spill into pathology you know
if you're feeling too broken too
inadequate whatever but if you don't
have enough there's also pathology on
that side how do you help people walk
that balance is it the prefrontal cortex
well it's always this balance between
your prefrontal cortex so think of that
as the break in your brain
but you don't want it too strong when it
works too hard people have ocd it's sort
of like the break is always on and so if
you think of a car like i like going to
big bear and think about coming down the
hill you need a good pre-frontal cortex
you need a good break because if the
brake's not on you die because you go
off a cliff which is
apropos people don't break their
behavior
and they make bad decisions and so they
die early but if the break is always on
you can't get down the hill either
because it's like stop stop stop stop
think of people have ocd so it's about
balance between
the front third of your brain prefrontal
cortex and your emotional brain because
we need passion we need purpose we need
a reason to do something
but if it works too hard we get sad or
we get too anxious or we come
traumatized
the wounded dragons just so common way
more common now since the pandemic
wounded dragon is i am broken in some
way or something it's i've had trauma
okay and i tell literal stories of
reliving it was so hard for me but when
i was little i had this beautiful white
goat
who um
was our pet sugar yeah and
um i actually have this video i did a
public television special on the new
book and i actually showed the video of
me when i'm five
playing with sugar and sugars kissing me
and it was just beautiful but sugar also
liked my dad's roses
and so one day sugar went off to the
farm which means sugar got slaughtered
right and a couple of nights later my
dad and his brother were joking
that they were feeding us sugar for
dinner which
was incredibly traumatic for me
and
years later were you at this point
like six five or six
and i mean i remember it like it's
yesterday
but years later i was in monterey mexico
giving a big talk
and
they have goat meat for sale in street
vendors
like we don't do that in the united
states
and as i walked by
i got flooded with that memory
and all of a sudden i'm 43 or something
have a panic attack wow because the past
is always connected to the present and
so
if there's trauma
learning how and i talk about this in
the book how to
recognize it and disconnect from it
okay so that's
recognizing it disconnecting doing the
unwinding is a tall order before we get
to that can you what are some of the
most common dragons and if you have one
of these running rampant in your life
your prefrontal cortex isn't putting the
brakes on it what what does that
manifest as in in the more common
dragons
well so we've had over a hundred
thousand people take the quiz
knowyourdragons.com so people can do
that it's free
and
on average people have six of them so
it's
common to have issues
and
the anxious dragon is the most common
the responsible dragon where
you feel like you have to take care of
other people which actually can breed
this thing called codependence and
entitlement and others just be careful
with that
the wounded dragon the
inferior flawed dragon it's very common
and it's basically i compare myself to
you in a negative way
um social media is driving that epidemic
um
and the death dragon sort of surprised
me but you know we did the study during
covid and is that a fear of death it's
the fear of death dragon
and
a lot of people haven't come to grips
with
death
like one of the strategies i have
actually played out today
is write down 10 good things about dying
whoa
and
um
it's like oh well that's okay because
if it's inevitable it is right it's it's
like you have to learn to embrace it
and
there's a lot of writing exercises in in
the book because i actually want people
to write their story and give it the
ending they want and then ask themselves
every day then kick in your prefrontal
cortex is my behavior
getting me
what i want because too often people go
for fixes that fail
rather than fixes that fix
okay so first we're going to identify
our dragon okay so i have the fear of
death reagan or i have the anxiety
dragon as somebody who suffered with the
anxiety dragon that one's very easy for
me to relate to
okay so i have the anxiety dragon i'm
obsessing about a future that
i'm
practicing the failure unintentionally
this was my thing
i would find my what i thought of as
exit ramps like if this situation
becomes problematic what's my exit ramp
but in thinking about all of my exit
ramps i was rehearsing it going wrong
wrong wrong wrong wrong
and
when i'm journaling the idea i want to
bring together with this so i identify
my dragon but now when i'm doing the
journaling how do i get to accurate
thinking because the problem in the
first place is that i have a cognitive
distortion i have a a tendency to think
of how the things could go wrong or at
least that felt like the right way to
plan for the future i've since stopped
doing that
how do you recognize what accurate
thinking actually is and you go through
this in the book because you you have
that like four questions that you have
people do i think it was for and there's
uh a part in there where they would
often say like i'm gonna fail are you
gonna fail yes like to them that seems
self-evidently true so how do you help
them recognize that that isn't actually
accurate
like help them question it
whenever you feel sad or mad or nervous
or out of control write out what you're
thinking
and then
it's five questions but it's is it
true is it absolutely true with 100
certainty
and that's the one that usually cracks
it
like um worthless
is it absolutely true
now you're getting thoughtful it's like
well i'm a mother
and i'm a sister and i'm a daughter and
no it's not absolutely true it's
ridiculous
the third question is how do i feel
when i believe
i'm worthless
dead
withering
sad
lonely
and the fourth question is who would i
be without the thought or how would i
feel if i didn't have the thought the
most common answer to that one is free
and then
you flip it around
to the opposite
it's like
i
am worth
something or i have work
and then
give me an example
or two or three or four
and you have to do that exercise at
least 100 times
to begin to retrain your automatic
response
i mean i've been teaching people to kill
ants for a long time automatic negative
thoughts but i just found these
five questions they're just so elegant
to just have a dialogue
with yourself i'll never be successful
or i won't have
enough money
or my life has no meaning
it's like
well let's put that under a microscope
not positive thinking
accurate
thinking
okay so
putting myself in the shoes of somebody
that's trapped in one of these dragons
my gut instinct and you've done this so
much more than i have but my gut
instinct is the part that they're going
to struggle with the most is
they're going to say the opposite right
so i have worth i have value it just
isn't going to feel true or it's going
to feel true at such a low rung level
like yes okay fine i have some value but
jesus is it enough to be worth
everything that i'm going through i find
that people are so ill-equipped to
accurately identify what their abilities
are their capabilities their worth their
value all that but i'm like don't even
worry about what's true ask yourself
what's useful and if it's useful to tell
yourself i'm a good person i have worth
and that gets you moving towards doing
the things that are actually worthy
then we're gonna do it
does that make sense to you or do you
think there's something better well
well not better i like it it's
with each of the dragons in the book
i have their origin story so where did
they come from
what's the upside because all the
dragons have upsides my abandoned
invisible and insignificant dragon had
tremendous upside for me um
how do you tame it so it's more than
just correct your thinking
so there's strategy so for one seeking
significance
well that's useful and it could be
volunteering at church
it you know whatever fits
your definition internally of
significance and then i have meditations
around
each of them
um
so
think of that as foundational like the
wounded dragon for example i talk about
emdr eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing and
it's so powerful it's when
you're traumatized it actually gets
stuck in your brain and we see a pattern
we call it the diamond pattern in the
brain so your emotional brain gets
turned on and it can't go back to normal
or healthy and
emdr they actually have you bring up the
trauma
while they get your eyes to move back
and forth
and it settles it down
so as an example 1996. so i've been
doing imaging for 30 years the first 20
years
it was like
a horror film in my life because i was
getting picked on and i had the new york
times pick on me the washington post
and
my colleagues calling me bad names and
i'm like i just want to look at the
brain what's your problem
um and in 1996 i had the state of
california's medical board investigate
me yeah i never heard that before crazy
that was traumatizing
and i couldn't sleep and one of the
original emdr trainers worked for me
and i walked into jennifer lindell's
office in my clinic and i'm like you
need to help me
after an hour of this treatment
i was absolutely fine if they took my
license from me i could get a job i
could take care of my family i was going
to be fine but you can just imagine you
spend
a big chunk of your life trying to do
what you do
and now someone's trying to take it away
from you
why does the lateral eye movement
shift the brain so profoundly that you
go from i can't sleep this is a total
mess to one session and now i'm good
i think it's more than just eye movement
there's another technique that's
somewhat similar that's a part of the
same technique
no
but it's similar it's called havening
okay and but they're both bilateral
hemisphere stimulation
so for example
off camera we talked about how my dad
died last year
and a couple of days after he died
um
in a random stack of papers i'm at my
mom's house just helping her organize
things
is a picture of my dead dad in the
mortuary and i'm like
what idiot
because it just bothered me and i
noticed it was just bothering me
throughout the day you know i'd see the
picture and i'd be irritated
and then i'm like oh you help people who
have this problem
and
havening is bilateral hemisphere
stimulation so it's either rubbing your
hands like this while you think of the
trauma
it's rubbing your face probably not cool
in a pandemic
or what my favorite thing is and i do
this a lot with my patients is i have
them
hold their shoulders and then rub down
to their forearms and they do it for 30
seconds and the idea is to get
stimulation on both sides of your body
on both sides while you bring up the
trauma do you have to do it yourself or
can someone else do it for you either
way
and people can learn about it at
havening.org like safehavenhavening.org
and so i did that with the picture
and you rate it like on a scale of one
to ten and that was like a nine i was
pretty irritated by this and after i did
it for 30 seconds
it's like a four
and then after i did it again the
irritation was gone i did it two more
times for 30 seconds and i fell in love
with the picture because it was
the last picture of my dad on earth
and so
there are techniques
so that you don't have to live with
trauma spinning
in your brain whether it's emdr
other people do tapping which can be
helpful
or haven't
i want to speculate about why that's
working so
when i meditate what's useful about
meditation the only times that it works
for me are when i can really lock into
the pleasure cycle of the breath so i
have to be thinking about
optimizing the pleasure of each part of
the breath by doing that i really pull
my brain to like what is happening right
here right now
one it helps because it's truly when
you're breathing in a meditative way it
it just feels good
like purely hedonistically it just feels
good and then my mind can't wander to
whatever is freaking it out because i'm
there in my breath
and
i'm wondering if this is a
there's something about stimulating both
sides of the brain that's the important
part or if this is just
your
focus
is now locking in on the sensation of
being touched or touching yourself and
that disrupts
because i think a lot about pattern
interrupting that you're just hitting
the brakes on this runaway thought
and
by touching yourself by tapping by
whatever
that you you're grounding in a physical
sensation which stops your brain from
thinking about the traumatic thing
that's sort of bullet point one but
bullet point two is that you fell in
love with the photo but let's take these
one at a time do you think is it the
bilateral activation of the brain that's
critical or is it just the focus
i think it's a bilateral hemisphere
stimulation because a lot of times
people will bring up drama and focus on
it and it doesn't make them feel any
better it makes them feel worse but i
did a study on emdr we took police
officers who were involved in shootings
and they developed ptsd and couldn't go
back to work
and
[Music]
i scanned them
and then i scanned them during their
first emdr session so while the
therapist was bringing up the trauma and
the scanning them in that moment or you
scan them after it in that moment
interesting and
so okay before you go what's up they're
emotional what does it look like when
they're ptsd'd out
so when they have ptsd if you look at
the scans i do it looks like a diamond
pattern
where their limbic or emotional brain
is more active compared to a healthy
brain
and then in that trauma activation it
gets bigger
gets more intense
but after they did an average of eight
sessions calmed it down and
that
psychological intervention had
biological effects
okay so that all makes sense
now when i'm stroking myself
i am
recalling the memory
i'm activating bilaterally my brain i
don't understand why that breaks
the elevation of the emotion
why yeah and i'm not sure we know why we
just know it does it was actually
discovered
by francine shapiro when she was in
menlo park
that when she looked
left and then right and did it over and
over again what she was upset about
didn't upset her as much and it was
really from that moment she then started
working
with
soldiers from the va and did she comment
on why she did it the first time was it
accidental it was accidental
so intriguing okay yeah and now we have
other groups like the haven in group
there's another group called brain
spotting
but they all
seem to be bilateral hemispheres
stimulation tools
to bring up the trauma and sort of suck
the
emotion
out of it so you still remember
uh you know i still remember
being investigated by the medical board
[Music]
but i don't get freaked out do you tell
yourself a new story so you pull so one
of the things i find most fascinating
about memory is that every time you pull
it into your working memory
you're affecting it
and so you can change the tenor of that
memory the emotional resonance of that
memory as you hold it in working memory
and then store it back so as you're
doing this you're doing the havening
you're or the bilateral eye movement or
both you're pulling the memory forward
are you
to optimize the process do you need to
tell yourself a different story about it
do you need to focus on the positive
things that came out of it and you talk
about being able to find positives and
death
is that what we're doing or you
literally just need to
think about it in the normal way that
you always think about it in your i'm
sure obsessive way but as long as you're
doing that bilateral contact it's going
to lower the emotion for many people
that's exactly what happens
other people not so much and so then you
have to go what else is going on
and
do they have a hurt pre-frontal cortex
so a lot of the soldiers that we work
with their ptsd
and traumatic brain injury people just
didn't focus on the fact that they were
around three
ied blasts
and so
when things don't work like you hoped
they would that's where the imaging work
i do becomes so helpful but the second
fascinating element here so we
understand now how lower the emotional
resonance
but how did you fall in love with that
photo it so even when you retold it to
me it sounded like a change in story
that you went from
that's a photo of my father's death to
that's the last photo of somebody that i
loved and cared about
is that a narrative shift that's
required to get that new emotional
anchor or or the
the association with that physical
sensation is pleasant and therefore it
paints that new emotion on an old memory
so part of it is skill
um
my children get horrified if i want to
watch pollyanna one of my favorite
movies ever pollyanna teaches people to
play the glad game whatever situation
you're in what is there to be glad about
in this situation so i've trained my
brain to do that
over time
and
when you take the emotion out
something's going to replace it
and
if you have skill in managing your mind
you'll often look for what's right
rather than what's wrong
and and i've worked really hard on that
because it wasn't my nature growing up i
was pretty anxious and i was masterful
at predicting what's the worst thing
that could happen and then i'd make it
worse so
i know it hallmark of people that have
panic attacks
um
but i've worked really hard and it's the
blessing of my job i get to help people
and in that i always help myself
okay so
we need to identify what our dragons are
we need to
engage our prefrontal cortex to make
sure that we pump the brakes on that
stuff we need to reframe things get good
at the glad game the pollyanna game
whatever we're going to call that
we need to engage with reality so how
are things really instead of trying to
run or hide from it both the good and
the bad so don't over
um think you're a loser failure whatever
um yeah it's completely not helpful
because negative thinking disrupts brain
function
um but at the same time too positive of
thinking you could be driving down the
freeway at 125 miles an hour in the rain
i mean
positive thinking by itself
is harmful that we have to be
thoughtful
careful
um right and that's the pre-frontal
cortex there's a whole chapter in the
book on the dragon tamer
it's like how do you tame this dragon
thunder
um
and you do it with having forethought
and judgment impulse control which means
oh by the way you have to feed it right
there's a whole section in the book on
the scheming
dragons which is really how society is
stealing
your mind if you're scheming to make you
worse
yeah like there's the holiday dragon
right oh it's thanksgiving let's eat
terribly right uh or it's halloween or
christmas you know we're going to
celebrate the birth of the baby jesus by
eating terribly and hurting people it's
like
how does that make
sense and
there's a brand new 12-step program in
this book uh
because there's the addicted dragons i
talk about the bad habit dragons and as
i was writing that i'm like you know the
12-step program for addiction
was written basically in the 1930s and
there's not one neuroscience step
in the 12 steps it's mostly
psychological social and spiritual and
i'm like well if a neuroscientist
rewrote the 12 steps
what would he add
that step one in the traditional 12
steps is admit your life is out of
control
and i'm like no that's step two step one
is what do you want
relationships work money physical
emotional but what do you want step two
is your behavior getting you what you
want if it's not
then you need
step three which is get your brain right
because i really think better brain
better decisions better brain better
relationships better brain more money
better brain better life no doubt i've
never heard anybody talk about goals
before like i'm obsessed with that and
it just seems like people don't bring it
up uh but here we go this is from the
book you're more likely to be able to
protect yourself from dragons and ants
we've talked about those when you have
clear goals a healthy blood sugar level
plenty of sleep no alcohol in your
system and you talk about marijuana as
well which would be nice and
controversial you don't mention it in
this quote but um you have in the book
and you are not hungry angry lonely or
tired and i thought
that really sums up
the
protective mechanisms the things you
have to look out for and what you have
to do
walk people through
why are goals so important
why is a guy
that spent 40 years focused on brain
health talking about that and how did
you come to realize just how useful that
is
you have to tell your brain what you
want
because it's always listening and if you
don't know what you want and i ask
all of my patients what do you want
they'll talk about money
or they'll
like i have a
17 almost 18 year old daughter
and she's had two boyfriends
and i've dismissed them both but it's
like what do you want
and they talk about money
and i'm like
no
that's a side effect of a meaningful
purposeful
life
having that is the goal is a terrible
goal
and
i like money i always say to my team no
margin no mission right you have to make
money
but if that's the point that's the
prescription for unhappiness
and
i've always
and i got this when i was a medical
student
it's
people get burned out
when they become unbalanced
and so when i ask my patients what they
want
relationships
work
money it's important but it can't be the
thing right
physical emotional spiritual health what
do you want in a balanced way
because if you know
then you're more likely to get it
so for example
you've met tana uh
i want a kind caring loving supportive
passionate relationship with my wife
i always want that
but i don't always feel like that
but when i'm thoughtful
when i know my goals because they're
posted
i'm so much more likely to act like that
which means i'm going to have a great
marriage
especially if she has clear goals too
and we have similar goals for our
relationship
do you guys talk about your goals all
the time and when you say they're posted
where are they posted so i have them
posted in my bathroom
and i have them on my phone
very smart and and so
everything it comes out i love like
three letter three word sentences or
three weird questions
and like for the ans is it true
and for goals is does it fit does my
behavior
today
fit the goals
i have for my life so last night i was
at the orange county fair they had fried
butter puffs
doesn't fit
the goals i have right because one of my
goals is to be physically healthy if
you're trying to change medical
specialty you want to live a long time
because it's going to take a long time
and so i want to be healthy because that
gives me
energy
and happiness and
so the
butter fried butter puffs didn't fit
yeah i think this is a a super
underserved um
thing it
it there's a great tony robbins school
if you don't know where you want to be
in five years you're already there and i
remember when i heard that i was like oh
my god like so many people have dreams
about where they want to go and what
they want to do but they stay these sort
of vague amorphous blobs and they never
get defined and therefore you never
achieve them and your future is always
five years away and you're just you're
stuck in this perpetual sameness so it's
really interesting to hear you talk
about that so now
let's say that they have their goal
they've written it down they posted it
they see it multiple places in their
house
how do they go about getting the brain
that they're going to need to actually
get there so we know that we don't eat
our butter puffs in fact what i'll ask
is why don't we eat our butter puffs we
want to live a long time i get that but
specifically what what is the problem
with
fried butter yeah like what makes
something bad food i think that's the
right way to ask it
i come up with this new phrase i just
love so much
that you only want to love food that
loves you back
that you're in a relationship with food
i think 30 of the mental health problems
in america are related to our
terrible diet
that you are what you eat in large part
and if you're eating
i call them the weapons of mass
destruction highly processed
pesticide sprayed high glycemic low
fiber food like substances stored in
plastic containers you're not going to
be healthy you poison
your gut you're poisoning your brain
and i publish three studies now the last
one on 35 000 scans one of the world's
largest imaging studies
tom you will not believe this there was
a linear correlation on virtually every
area of the brain as people's weight
went up the activity and blood flow in
their brain went down i believe that
themselves absolutely
healthy weight
overweight obese morbidly obese in a
linear
fashion when i saw those graphs when i
was doing the research i was just like
horrified and i come from a family of
fat people uh my dad used to hate when
i'd say that but i have a brother that's
150 pounds overweight and a sister it's
the same thing and i know if i just ate
everything that looked good to me
i would be too and no i'm not having
that especially because i don't want a
small brain
right and
and people go oh that's fat shaming and
i feel terrible about it because 72 of
the country is overweight think about
that i mean how insane is that 42 of
people
are obese the pandemic made it worse
we should be worried about that because
the extra fat on your body produces
inflammatory cytokines and we know
inflammation is a major cause of
depression and dementia the fat on your
body takes healthy testosterone which we
need
which men and women need and it turns it
into unhealthy cancer-promoting forms of
estrogen
that's a bad thing
fat stores toxins we need to get serious
about being in a healthy way with
healthy food
and so
diet is critical
exercise supplementation i think is
really important it is studied 97 of the
population
low on omega-3 fatty acids and so
finding ways to supplement about 80
percent of us are deficient in vitamin d
in a pandemic that's not okay nope right
because people with low vitamin d
actually die more if they get covered
19. so yeah going back to what you're
saying about fat shaming
so first of all i come from a morbidly
obese family as well and i've often said
that you
when you love something you don't hate
on it look down on it like i don't think
less of people because they're obese
but going back to the idea of facing
reality
at the same time i know that i will lose
them earlier than i absolutely have to
if they continue to live that lifestyle
and so getting people especially now in
a pandemic to just face that it isn't
fat shaming to say you're more likely to
survive this
disease that's ravaging you know the
entire human population
if you are living a healthy lifestyle
get your weight under control
exercise eat right work out all of that
stuff
because there's nothing worse than
trying to solve a problem when
you ignore the thing that's actually
causing it like you're just at that
point it's really about
symptom mitigation versus figuring out
what's really going on
um
do you think that this so going back to
weight specifically i want to pick up on
that for a second because i learned a
long time ago as a psychiatrist if you
don't admit you have a problem
you can't solve it dude that is so true
until i finally admitted to my wife that
i was anxious i i couldn't make progress
and finally i just was like i have
to tell her and it really did not make
me feel good about myself because you
know there is something about the way
that she would look at me like i could
do anything and that felt so good and to
finally be like yo i'm over here i am
struggling homie like this is really
gnarly
and of course it wasn't the turn off
that i feared it was going to be and it
only brought us closer together but that
was really hard to admit but then once i
could say it out loud to the person that
was the only person i really cared about
in pressing
then it was like okay now i can actually
deal with this
because when you become more real
you become more relatable
and this so many guys don't understand
this that they deny that they have a
problem because they want to be
perceived as the person who has it all
together but then nobody can relate to
you
um
you know that's one of the reasons i
became really vulnerable
in the book and i haven't gotten any
haters
i mean i have plenty of haters don't get
me wrong but from writing for that
from on that stand
um
but i remember when i did the big nfl
study at the time when the nfl was sort
of lying they had a problem and
my
letter to the commissioner so you don't
admit you have a problem you can't solve
it and it's going to get worse and and
that came from marriages where
especially the guy wouldn't admit that
they were struggling and
it ended up falling apart
yeah
i can certainly understand that so okay
we
admit that we have a problem whether
it's about weight or whatever um how do
we begin to
unwind this stuff
that's really i think the the important
thing is it does it just come down to
look there are because you you write in
the book and i wrote them down so i can
read them out if we need to but um
they're just are there just certain
things you just have to do and you just
you have to do them and until you do
them like this is never going to change
well and that's the bad habit chapter
you know i have the bad habit dragons
there's the overeater bad habit dragon
the worst of all the dragons is the
oblivious dragon the dragon is that an
intentional like you're intentionally
being oblivious or people that really
just don't know
you just don't know and you haven't
taken the time you go i'm fat because
everybody in my family's fat it's like
no i have a lot of fat people in my
family and i'm not because i don't give
in to the behaviors making it likely to
be so
and so it's about being intentional
reading the labels of the food you eat
of the products you put on your body
it's asking yourself this one question
is this good for my brain or bad for it
right i mean ultimately in all of my
books i try to create brain envy i want
people to love their brains
and is this good for my brain or bad for
it and the reason that brain envy works
just to be clear is because you can
improve your brain how exciting is that
and i've proven that over and over and
nfl players and soldiers and police
officers that you're not stuck
and intuitively people should know that
right if i don't sleep tonight i'm not
going to think well tomorrow but no
one's thinking about the physical
functioning of their
brain so i'm in justin bieber's new
docuseries seasons and he came out i've
been his doctor for a long time
and like many celebrities he'd do it i'd
say sometimes i show up sometimes but
then
because he went through a really hard
time
he came into my office and he said i get
it
my brain is an organ like my heart is an
organ if you told me i had heart
problems i'd do everything you say i'm
gonna do everything you say
and he got radically better
and
you got to love it
and we have to stop this whole mental
illness thing i hate it because it's not
mental illness it's brain health
get your brain right and your mood is
better you're happier you're more
focused you make less bad decisions
which will decrease your anxiety
speaking of anxiety so
you said earlier that you think 30 of
mental health brain health problems are
tied to
diet
in my end of one experience i think it's
even higher than that so
when i think about okay suffering from
profound anxiety i'm trying all the
mental tricks and there's no doubt they
helped i mean very very beneficial but i
just couldn't i felt like i was
learning to better cope with the
symptoms but i wasn't
eliminating the symptoms
and so i was like what is going on and
then of course because of what my wife
went through from a health perspective
become aware of the gut start really
thinking about
what i'm eating and that there are going
to be things that might be messing me up
that i just would never have guessed
long time listeners in my show will grow
tired of hearing the following statement
but at the beginning of kovid i went
through something really weird that i'd
never experienced before i was getting
super tired all the time brain fog just
like almost losing my zest for life and
i was like this is really bizarre
and i thought okay well what would you
tell somebody if they came and
described those symptoms and i was like
no matter what i would tell them it's
something that you're eating because
that's just so true in terms of the way
if your body's being affected your
brain's being affected it's almost
certainly something you're eating
and i'm like but my diet's so healthy
like how could this possibly be
and i was like just eliminate whatever
you're eating a lot of and see what
happens and i'm like what am i eating a
lot of and i was like pecans
and so i cut out pecans 48 hours later i
was back in business i was like how the
hell is it possible that pecans evolved
and they were like raw they weren't even
like roasted i mean these were like the
all but just plucked off a tree so i was
i anyway i couldn't fathom that that was
it but it was it
and then that got me thinking wait a
second could my anxiety be tied to
something i'm eating and so then i
started cutting out
anything processed because dude i love
my zero calorie drinks love them in a
way i can't even begin to tell you but
of course that comes with a lot of
chemicals that i've never even heard of
and i've heard of a lot of chemicals and
in cutting all of that out the what my
anxiety feels like to me now i might
still have a thought about something's
gonna go wrong in the future
and that will trigger that that feeling
of like oh something bad is coming
but it never escalates food is so
important
and
when i put my patients on an elimination
diet so we basically eliminate the bad
things
they get
so much better
and
the nutritionists that work with us have
more success stories than the
psychiatrists and i used to irritate me
food matters
what you put in your mouth your
microbiome
matters we have these hundred trillion
bugs in our gut and what we feed them
you know helps to grow the ones that
make you happy or they help to grow the
ones that make you angry and sad
it's just so
important and our biggest blog last year
uh i wrote one called i told you so and
when i and i started with when i dated
tana she told me i will never tell you i
told you so she lied it's like her
favorite thing to say
and then
i said but the american cancer society
just came out and said you shouldn't
drink
why it increases your risk of seven
different kinds of cancer not to mention
it prematurely people were given that
advice i was like
like this one just doesn't land for me
it just doesn't seem possible
that it would be essentially a health
food what about weed
marijuana is
uh in
that it's very interesting it's in
i published a study on a thousand
marijuana users every year their brain
is lower in activity now does help some
people like when my father what what
does it actually help with it helps
increase appetite
for some people it can actually decrease
seizure frequency
it suppresses
activity in the brain
i'm very worried
because as the perception of
dangerousness of a drug goes down its
use goes
up especially in teenagers and if you're
smoking or
eating edibles as a teenager
you've just increased your risk
of anxiety depression and suicide in
your 20s
so that's it's not good and i you know
all child psychiatrists i'm also a child
psychiatrist have the experience of all
of a sudden the 16 year old is not
acting right and we test them and they
end up positive for marijuana that it's
not innocuous
and i think that's the important thing
now is it worse than alcohol well
actually i published a study on 62 000
this is the world's largest imaging
study 62 000 scans on how the brain ages
and then we looked at what accelerated
aging schizophrenia was the worst your
brain looked 10 years older than people
who didn't have schizophrenia the second
worst and it was a surprise for me was
marijuana your brain worse than alcohol
worse than alcohol worse than smoking
what
i am startled by that yeah i was too and
it's like it's the data and i have no
dog in the fight right if you smoke if
you don't smoke you're just actually
more likely to see me if you do is it
lowering blood flow like it's lowering
blood flow to the brain
wow i thought for sure you were going to
say alcohol was the worst
yeah but neither of them are good
man that's crazy
yeah so food can make you happy
so can drugs that's the that's the
problem like when i think about all the
the insults that people can do to their
brain how important the brain is for the
mind and that your mind if you don't
have your mind under control your life
your life will be determined by how well
you control your mind like i just
because ultimately all we are is a
string of emotions things either make
you feel good bad or indifferent and
when you spend a lot of time feeling bad
life sucks when you spend a lot of time
feeling good life is great and it
doesn't matter if you have all the money
in the world if you feel bad life sucks
doesn't matter if you're broke as a day
is long if you feel good life is great
so
but the number of things that insult our
brain from just
concussive trauma from certain types of
contact sports
to
um sitting around to
uh
weed alcohol a lot of things that are
fun and over prescription of drugs oh my
god gadget screen time
yeah negative thoughts like it is
bananas and the amount of time that
people have to put into getting it right
so we have a high school course called
brain thrive by 25
and
i love this course
we play a game with them called who has
more fun
the kid with the good brain or the kid
with the bad brain who gets the girl and
gets to keep her because he doesn't act
like an ass the kid with a good brain or
the kid with the bad boy who gets into
college who gets the job they want who
has the most consistent positive
behavior
it's the person with the good brain this
is not about not having fun it's about
having fun with all of you intact
yeah and over a prolonged period of time
over a long period of time
dr ehman thank you so much for coming on
dude i always
love your books and time with you where
can people connect with you
and ensure that they have the good brain
over a long period of time
well they can
find us at eamonclinics.com so amen like
the last word in a prayer
clinics.com they can follow me on
facebook or instagram instagram it's at
doc underscore eamon we're doing a whole
cool series called scan my brain i've
done some just wonderful
influencers it's super fun and
we want to create a revolution
in brain health we want to end
mental illness and that whole discussion
and really start talking
with a better brain always comes a
better life
i love it i love it and thank you for
everything that you do
guys if you haven't already uh followed
him on every conceivable place do read
his books they are transformative and
speaking of things that are
transformative if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential